Title: Found This Week #1 
Date: 2021-09-19 
Category: Physics 
Tags: found-this-week

As this is the inaugural issue of the _found-this-week_ series, I'll briefly note my motivation and inspiration. The
title of this series is an overt nod to the famous series [_This Week's Finds_](https://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/TWF.html)
written by the inimitable John Baez. I have learned a great deal from that series and his book on gravity, and have the
utmost admiration for Baez' abilities as a physicist and communicator. It is my hope that this series will be found
useful by some, insightful by at least a few, and accessible by many. All feedback is welcome, and thank you in advance
for bearing with me as I develop these posts.

### Algebraic and Geometric Equivalence of Tangent Vectors

As will likely come up in future posts, I'm thoroughly enjoying
[Modern Differential Geometry for Physicists](https://amzn.to/39jLEEN) by Chris Isham. He develops formalism and
intuition without sacrificing rigor, all while carrying a conversational tone. See my
[reference review](/pages/texts-physics/#isham-modern-differential-geometry-for-physicists-i) for more on
[@ishamModernDifferentialGeometry1999].

Most students of physics or calculus are generally familiar with the notion of a tangent vector. This concept becomes
more nuanced, of course, when the ambient space is generalized from $\mathbb{R}^n$ to a manifold $\mathcal{M}$ of
dimension $n$. Isham takes an unusual approach to formalizing the tangent vector concept by introducing two
seemingly-different definitions (either of which are common among the relativity literature) and then formally proving
their equivalence (done _nowhere_ in the literature). I appreciated the demonstration of equivalence, and will sketch it
below.

_Tangent Vectors Geometrically_

Isham first introduces tangent vectors in the familiar, geometric manner. If we let $\gamma_1(\lambda)$ and $\gamma_2(
\lambda)$ be curves passing through a point $p$ on a patch of the manifold $\mathcal{M}$ such that $\gamma_1(\lambda=0)
= \gamma_2(\lambda=0) = p$, then it is natural to define the tangent vector $v_p$ at $p$ as an equivalence class of
curves, denoted $\left[\gamma\right]$, where the equivalence criteria is defined by sharing the tangent vector $v_p$:

$$ \left. \frac{d x^{\mu}}{d \lambda} (\gamma_1(\lambda)) \right|_{\lambda=0} = v_p = \left. \frac{d x^{\mu}}{d \lambda}
(\gamma_2(\lambda)) \right|_{\lambda=0} \tag{Geometric}$$

The tangent space $T_p \mathcal{M}$ can then be defined as the set of all tangent vectors at the point $p$, or the set
of all equivalence classes of curves at the point $p$.

_Tangent Vectors Algebraically_

The algebraic approach begins with the concept of a derivation, or directional derivative, $v$ as a map that is both
linear and obeys the Leibniz rule. By thinking of the smooth functions on the manifold $C^{\infty}(\mathcal{M})$ as a
ring over $\mathbb{R}$, we can define the map $v: C^{\infty}(\mathcal{M}) \to \mathbb{R}$ as:

$$v(f) \equiv \left. \frac{df\left( \gamma(\lambda) \right)}{d\lambda} \right|_{\lambda=0} \quad\text{ where }\quad
\left[\gamma\right] = v \tag{Algebraic}$$

By linear, we mean that for any $f, g \in C^{\infty}(\mathcal{M})$ and $r, s \in \mathbb{R}$, we have $v(rf + sg) = rv(
f) + sv(g)$, and by Leibniz rule we mean $v(fg) = f(p)v(g) + g(p)v(f)$. The set of all derivations at a point $p$ is 
denoted $D_p \mathcal{M}$.

_Equivalence of Definitions_

Isham shows that these two definitions of the tangent space, $T_p \mathcal{M}$ and $D_p \mathcal{M}$, are equivalent by
proving that the natural map between them $\iota$ is, in fact, an isomorphism, where $\iota: T_p\mathcal{M} \to
D_p\mathcal{M}$ is defined as:

$$\iota(v)(f) \equiv \left. \frac{df \left(\gamma\left(\lambda\right)\right) }{d\lambda} \right|_{\lambda=0}
\tag{Isomorphism}$$

To show that $\iota$ is an isomorphism, Isham demonstrates that it is both injective (one-to-one) and surjective (onto).
To show injectivity, assume that $\iota(\left[\gamma_1\right]) = \iota(\left[\gamma_2\right])$, then we must have

$$ \left. \frac{df \left(\gamma_1\left(\lambda\right)\right) }{d\lambda} \right|_{\lambda=0} = \left. \frac{df \left(
\gamma_2\left(\lambda\right)\right) }{d\lambda} \right|_{\lambda=0} $$

The above shows that both $\gamma_1$ and $\gamma_2$ are tangent at $p$, which implies that they are, in fact,
equivalent. Therefore $\left[\gamma_1\right] = \left[\gamma_2\right]$, and $\iota$ is injective. To show that $\iota$ is
surjective we choose an element $v$ of the range $D_p\mathcal{M}$ and define a curve $\gamma_v$ such that $\gamma_v(0) =
p$ and $v(x^{\mu}) = \frac{d}{d\lambda} x^{\mu} \circ \gamma(\lambda) |_{\lambda=0}$. Recall that we can expand a
tangent vector as $v_p$ in terms of derivatives of a coordinate system $x^{\mu}$ as $v = v^{\mu}\partial_{\mu}$ and
therefore $v(f) = v^{\mu} \partial_{\mu} f = \frac{d}{d\lambda} x^{\mu} \circ \gamma_v |_{\lambda=0} \partial_{\mu} f$.
But Isham shows:

$$\begin{align} \left. \frac{d}{d\lambda} f\circ \gamma_v \right|_{\lambda=0} &= \left. \frac{d}{d\lambda}(f \circ
\phi^{-1} \circ \phi \circ \gamma_v) \right|_{\lambda=0} \\ &= \sum_{\mu} \left. \frac{\partial}{\partial u^{\mu}} (f
\circ \phi^{-1}) \right|_{\phi(p)} \left. \frac{d}{d\lambda} u^{\mu} (\phi \circ \gamma_v) \right|_{\lambda=0} \\ &=
\sum_{\mu} \left(\frac{\partial}{\partial x^{\mu}}\right)_{p} f \left. \frac{d}{d\lambda} x^{\mu} \circ \gamma_v(
\lambda) \right|_{\lambda=0} = v(f)
\end{align}$$

Since $\frac{d}{d\lambda} f \circ \gamma_v |_{\lambda=0} = v(f)$, then $\left[\gamma_v\right](f) = v(f)$ and therefore
$\iota$ is surjective. This completes the proof, and we can robustly conclude that the geometric and algebraic pictures
are formally equivalent! We are then free to use either where convenient. 

### Swarms of Searching Particles

During a recent talk, the subject of optimization
particle swarm optimization

- global optimization
- global

General techniques [@clercParticleSwarmOptimization2006]
Gwave ligo example [@wangParticleSwarmOptimization2010]
Financial portfolio optimization [@chenParticleSwarmOptimization2021]


